# Proactively shaping proximity networks to reduce transmission of infectious disease

**Abstract:**
Evidence of the success of lockdowns and closure of large social events during the COVID-19 pandemic highlights the importance of who spends time near whom, i.e., proximity networks, on the propagation of infectious disease. It also suggests that a better understanding of how to manage proximity networks would be advantageous. Here, we use simulation to assess the use of a phone application to proactively re-shape proximity networks slow the spread of infectious disease. This phone application records proximity between individual users, e.g., within 2m for more than 15min, from which it generates a proximity network for a population. Crucially, the application then provides individuals with near real time information about their position within the proximity network and their current level of risk. Here risk is measured simply by a person’s location within the proximity network, and represents their contribution to network structure that promotes spread. This is a shift in focus form contact tracing apps that concentrate on identifying potential contact with infected individuals after the fact. We use a simulation approach to estimate 1) what proportion of users are required in the population to accurately estimate the true proximity network, and 2) what proportion of users are required in the population to adequately re-shape the proximity network to proactively reduce spread. We show that roughly >70% of the population is required to achieve an adequate representation of the true proximity network, but that, with only 10% of the population it is possible to modestly reduce the ability of an infectious disease to spread. Increasing participation rates increases this effect. We discuss the use of proactively shaping proximity networks from a commons perspective, as well as the privacy and ethical implications of applying a proactive approach in a centralized and decentralized way.

